Well, welcome in, Dr. Derek McAllister. For those who don't know Dr. Derek, Dr. Derek is
a professor of philosophy, and he's come to have a conversation with us heathens today.
And, Derek, we appreciate you spending some time with us.
So I will start with the typical question, which is, what would be the best evidence
or argument for your particular God being real?
Yeah, sure. So can I ask a preliminary question just before we get into that? Because I know
once we get into that, it'll kind of get left behind. So could I ask why you want to know?
Because I think believing things that are true is a good thing to do.
Okay. So is it a matter of, just to get clear here, you're trying to find out if God exists,
and if he exists, you're on board with it, you would believe? Or is it just maybe merely
educational? It's like, well, I just want to kind of lay out these answers out there for everybody
to see. It doesn't matter to me, either one. I just kind of want to know where we're starting from.
Well, I want to believe whatever is true, right? Now, it just so happens to be, I don't see any
good reason to believe that God is real. But if there was a good reason to believe so, I certainly
would. Now, when it comes to, like, the formal versions of God, like the God described in the
Quran or the Bible, different things like that, I don't think there's any redeeming those particular
God concepts. But if there's another God concept that can be proven, I'd certainly be open to it.
Sure. Yeah. So to answer your question, I'm Catholic. I'm a Catholic convert, actually,
it took me a while to get there. But I've only been Catholic for about six years now. Raised Christian,
more or less my whole life, I had a period where I was an atheist. So I'm quite familiar with the
thinking that goes into that. And I was convinced that God did this for a while. But so if you were
asking me my reasons, I think the best evidence for believing in God is the cosmological argument in
the original initial event of the Big Bang. Okay, so Kalam.
Well, not necessarily the Kalam version, but I prefer the five ways.
Aquinas'?
I take them all as, yeah, Aquinas' five ways, which originally are actually Aristotle's.
So I think it's significant that, you know, even a so-called pagan, you know, believed that there
was some divine creator beginning to the universe. Well, yeah. I mean, the pagans believed in a God
or multiple gods. I think the way we say pagan today has a different meaning than what people
might have meant a long time ago. But that being said, go ahead then, if that's the argument you
want to start with, I guess start it any way you want to, whether you want to explain it or
the way you don't want to give premises. Yeah. Well, so I have done videos on this. You're
welcome to go look at my channel on it. Anybody is welcome there in my lives. I did a full one and
two version of, I kind of split it into the five ways, one through three and the four through five.
So you're welcome to go see them if you really want to do a deep dive. But basically the idea is
it had to have come from somewhere, the initial event. And I think most, most scientists,
scientists, and I'm not sure about most philosophers because they're kind of wonky
sometimes, but most scientists believe in the big bang. Um, at last I checked the statistics on that
are about 99.9% of scientists believe in the big bang. It's just like what, what might be before,
whether there are multiverses, whether there's a big crunch coming after that or a big freeze.
So in other words, they put qualifications on what, what you mean by the big bang, but most believe
in a big bang, sort of some initial event. Um, now based on what I've seen with you before,
uh, you'd seem to think that the universe is eternal. Now, do, do you think that that,
I don't know. So I don't believe that obviously I think that there had to be some initial event.
Why? I wonder what makes you believe that. So I think because an infinite regress is impossible.
Why? Because if an infinite, if an infinite, if an infinite regress exists, then it had to have had
a cause. No, it's an infinite chain of causes. So when it comes to the universe existence, right?
It's either going to be, okay, the reason for the universe existing is just, there is no reason.
Another answer would be, okay, it has a reason for its existence, but it's within itself.
And then the third, of course, the Christian response would line up with this one.
It has a reason for its existence, but that reason is external to the universe. So I go with
the third, but which one of those are you going with?
Yeah. Well, I don't believe the universe has a reason, but I also don't think that
we have any reason to believe that it had an initial moment either.
So you don't believe in the Big Bang?
No, I do. I think you fundamentally misunderstand what the Big Bang is. The Big Bang is not saying
that the universe once didn't exist and then it poofed into existence. In fact, a recent study has
been done on this, a recent survey has been done on this and discovered that the majority of
cosmologists and physicists agree with that sentiment, that the Big Bang was not necessarily
the start of all things. It's just how we got to where we're at today.
Okay. So what came before the Big Bang then?
I mean, you tell me. No one really knows. Like, we don't have the tools to investigate
what form or what shape the universe was in prior to the Big Bang, but there's a couple
different models for it. There's cosmic inflation, there's quantum foam, and then there's the Big
Bang, Big Crunch theory. My particular opinion is that the Big Bang, Big Crunch theory is the
most, not the most credible, but I think it makes the most sense.
The Big Bang, Big Crunch?
Yeah.
Okay. That's where we had a bang and it's likely to sort of reverse and go back and do a crunch
and perhaps do the same thing over and over?
Yeah. An infinite number of times.
Okay. So I looked up that as well. And cosmologists, this is not necessarily a fringe
theory, but it's not a dominant theory. Not very many cosmologists.
Well, there's no dominant theory.
Well, the dominant theory would just be the Big Bang.
Well, the Big Bang doesn't posit before the Big Bang. The Big Bang doesn't make a claim as to
what came before it. Yeah. No. So in its current form, it is quiet about that. It has a sort of
agnostic view about what came before, if anything came before. And so these, like I was saying,
these qualifications or these add-ons, but this certain qualification, the one with the Big Bang
and then the Big Crunch, just is not one that's widely held.
Well, I would disagree. Where do you get that number from? Because I stream every Sunday with
an actual physicist, a PhD physicist who disagrees with that vehemently.
Okay. I mean, I'd love to talk to him. I mean, I'm open to learning about this.
But it's my understanding that that's not a very dominant model. First of all, because you would
need for it to slow down. It's not showing any signs of slowing down.
It is.
Expansion.
Okay. And if it were...
The acceleration rate, according to the latest DESE data, is that the acceleration is decreasing
with every measurement.
Because of that reversing. That's just sort of this hypothetical speculation that we
suppose will happen, but there's no evidence that it will.
Gravity is the evidence.
Why think that gravity will somehow make everything come back into one point?
Because that's how gravity works.
Gravity holds planets in orbit around their stars, around certain things with mass, but they don't.
I mean, what would be the central point of the universe that would be the thing with, you
know, infinite, almost infinite, but a really infinitesimal...
Well, sorry, I used that word wrong.
So a really large, let's say, mass enough to swallow the universe back up into itself.
Well, it's not being swallowed into a mass. It's forming a mass when it collapses.
Right.
Right. Yeah. I just... I mean, because if you get far enough away from a planet, you're
no longer in its orbit.
Yeah.
So this point, let's say the initial point, not chronologically speaking, but in spatial
terms, if you get far enough outside that thing's orbit, then it just wouldn't have any
impact on it anymore, especially if it's accelerating and it's decelerating.
So we're to suppose that somehow it's going to...
I mean, I can understand the reasoning because it's like throwing a ball into the air, but that's
when you have an enormous mass, the earth, with enormous force of gravity, and you're
throwing this really tiny ball up in the air. Of course, it's going to come back down.
But why think that the universe is like that? What would be the central point that is so...
Because we have mathematical models that predict it. So Sean Carroll has already done the work
on this. He's published on it.
Okay.
Okay. Yeah. So I'm not familiar with that. Now, I don't buy this. There's a lot of reasons
to be skeptical about this, I think. But I think we can even go further, right? So like
if this model is true, this supposes an infinite regress. And I just don't think an infinite
regress is possible. I think in principle, it's not possible.
Why not?
I think it's mathematically possible, but I don't think it's physically possible.
Well, why not?
Because we don't ever see that in reality. We've never seen it before.
So Dr. McAllister, I'll let you know, I have the infinite regress argument at least once
a week. Everybody who doesn't like this theory is positive that infinite regresses aren't
possible. Not one of them can tell me why. So if the only argument is, well, infinite regresses
aren't possible because I don't like them, that's not a good argument.
That's not the argument I'm making. I said that they're mathematically possible. Sure. I mean,
we can just think of negative numbers. They regress infinitely. But for someone to claim that in
the physical world, there's an infinite regress going back in time of physical objects, this is a
hard claim to swallow. I don't think it's physically possible. And because there's no direct
empirical observation of it.
Well, the observation in science is that matter and energy can't be created or destroyed.
So that means it existed forever.
That's not necessarily true.
Give me one good reason why I would believe that all the matter, time and space in our
universe once just didn't exist.
So, so let me go back to that claim. I agree with you that matter can neither be created nor
destroyed. Perfectly fine with me. I don't agree with the inference to the conclusion that
therefore the universe is eternal. I don't think, I think that's a bit of a leap.
Well, can something come from nothing?
No.
Okay. Well, we've got two logic arguments then. Premise number one, something doesn't come
from nothing. Premise number, or conclusion, or premise number two, we have something.
Conclusion, there's always been something.
Right. And the Christian would just say that that's God.
And the non-Christian would say there's no need for a God because the universe has existed
forever.
Right. So I, so let me, let me explain the reasoning here, like I'm trying to get at.
Right. So, like I said, I don't agree with the inference. I agree that matter can be neither
created nor destroyed, but I don't agree with the inference to the conclusion. Therefore the
universe is eternal. I don't agree with that because the Christian can also say consistently
that, yeah, matter can neither be created nor destroyed once matter has been introduced
into the world. Like, yeah, because why would we even have that principle to begin with? Because
through direct observation, we have this principle in science by people during the alignment
area, during the 1600s, 1700s saying, well, you know, matter can neither be created nor
destroyed. They're not saying that from the standpoint of the beginning of the universe.
They're saying it as a principle of science based on observation. And then there, and so
to take that, take that really narrow claim and then apply it to, well, I suppose then
like, it would be understandable that within their perspective, that of course, at that time
in history, making that claim is not an extraordinary outlandish claim because it's understandable
that something would neither be created nor destroyed now, but that doesn't entail that it
was never created to begin with. Does that make any sense, what I'm saying?
It makes sense, but we have no evidence that it was created or that it once didn't exist, right?
Before we posit a need for a creator, we probably need to lay down some sort of established fact
that it once didn't exist and needed to come into an existence.
Yeah. So I think a few of the arguments, Thomas Aquinas, like the contingency argument,
for example, the idea that not everything in the world can be contingent.
Why not?
And so if you want to say that the universe is eternal, I think you would have to say that
it would be necessary. Do you think that that's, do you think the universe necessarily exists? Like
it couldn't possibly be otherwise?
I mean, the fact that it exists, I think demands that it does exist necessarily or else it wouldn't
exist.
So it seems like a kind of bite the bullet, um, position you'd have to take. And that's
understandable. Um, is that the universe exists? I'm willing to bite that bullet. Yeah.
That's not what I meant that the universe exists necessarily because it exists.
So that the universe exists necessarily, it's sort of a bite the bullet. And that's understandable
because like, what other response could you have other than saying, uh, because, because if you want
to say it's contingent, which, you know, I think most things in the universe are contingent, right?
But like, I would say nearly everything in the universe is contingent, but professor, not
everything.
Look at it from my point of view, right? We're saying that the thing that we know exists, the
universe, right? I'm saying the thing that we know for a fact exists, exists necessarily.
You're saying, no, it once didn't exist and something that we have no evidence of caused it
to exist. So you're saying, I'm saying the thing we know exists, exists necessarily. You're saying a
thing that we don't know exists, exists necessarily and caused everything to come into existence.
I think one of those is just an easier thing to grab hold of than the other. And the thing that's
easier to grab a hold of is the thing that we know already exists.
That's fair. But think about this claim that the universe exists necessarily. Like I don't make
this claim about like oak trees, for example, obviously, because oak trees are contingent.
It could have been otherwise. Like if an acorn falls down a hill, lands in a different spot,
gets eaten up by a squirrel or something, there's not going to be an oak tree there. So it could
very well have been otherwise. And you and I are both contingent. In fact, everything in the world
that we know of is contingent. So why think that universe is somehow different?
Why is it not contingent?
Right.
No, no, I'm asking you. In my worldview, it's an infinite regress of contingencies.
Do you see the absurdity that, with all due respect, like the infinite regress of contingencies?
Again, you haven't provided a reason why I should reject an infinite regress other than
incredulity. That if all you have against this is incredulity, you don't have an argument.
It's not incredulity. I'm expressing incredulity, but it's not merely
incredulity. That's my reason. Let me try to unpack it.
Then why can there not be an infinite regress in the past the same way there's going to be
infinite stuff in the future?
So if there were an infinite regress of contingent, let's say, chain of a series of events,
right? Because that's all the universe is. It's just objects. And then, you know,
there are changes, right? That accounts for both space and time.
I think we agree there. Yeah. Is right. Space is just a measurement between objects
and time is just a measurement between change. So, so really we're not talking about space and
time. Forget about that. Those are just kind of like the buckets in which we place these things.
Really, we're talking about objects and their changes.
Well, I think you, for that conversation to be had, you might refer to physics and physics
believes that time and space are a web that is somehow a fundamental property of the physical
reality, right? So I don't know if I would call space time a bucket because it seems to be a property
of the physical world. But I'm not a physicist. Someone like Sean Carroll, Dr. Blitz, William Kinney,
like they could explain that in great detail that someone of, of my position couldn't.
Sure. And I'm speaking outside of my expertise just to flag this. I'm not,
I don't specialize in this area. Um, so I would be the first to defer to somebody who is an expert on
these things. But so far as I understand it, um, space time, however, they're interwoven,
uh, it takes into, though that thing is not something that actually exists itself. That's
why I use the metaphor of a bucket. Uh, we can discard that if you like, but, but the idea here
is that space doesn't, it's almost like a hole. Can I ask a clarifying question? Are you suggesting
space time doesn't exist? I guess I'm confused. In the sense that a hole does not exist, right? If I dig
a hole, the hole doesn't exist because there's nothing like physical. There's no matter there or
anything like that's all I'm saying about space. Like it's just the space, the emptiness between
objects. I mean, perhaps I, I don't know if that's my understanding of space time, but I don't know
if it matters for, for where we, where we're trying to get to. And I don't know if we want to waste a
bunch of time on that, especially since neither one of us are actually physicists. Sure. So the idea
here is that instead of talking about space, time, and the beginning of the universe, because really
the universe is just the collection of the whole, I want to just talk about objects, the things
inside the universe, because that's really our, our, yeah, that's our focus. We want to talk about
the changes between those things. And, and once you talk about, you move the focus to those things,
talk about those things are the things that form the series, the series of causes,
the cause and effect, right? Um, I don't think that a series of contingent things
can have a cause and cause of it. Sorry. Cause and effect chain forever. Right. Why not? Because
if we are seeing, so let's take the line of dominoes, this very basic example, obviously the universe is
much more complex than that. And the objects in the universe are more complex, but if we take a line
of dominoes, the domino line is falling now, which, you know, in our analogy, it is falling. Now it's
moving. Now we see objects that are moving causes and effects are happening. So the line of dominoes
and the analogy they're falling. What we're saying, if it extends infinitely into the past is there is
no beginning. And so if there is no beginning, then the dominoes that are falling now shouldn't be
falling because they never began to fell. They never began to fall. We don't have dominoes.
I understand the metaphor. The metaphor is like, we shouldn't have movement if there wasn't a first
move, but I disagree. I think it's a category or you're, you're suggesting that there needs to be
a first movement for movement to happen. I'm inferring based on, you know, there is movement now
and there had to be, have movement begin to move. So there had to have figure out, you know,
let it be at whatever time you'd like. It could have been two hours ago, you know, could some
metaphysicians play around with this? They're like, Oh yeah, the universe could have just popped
into existence a second ago or something. I mean, theoretically that is possible. Like all of,
all of our memories could just be fictitious made up at the moment of creation two minutes ago.
Sure. Yeah. So people like to play around with this. So, so I'm not suggesting that of course,
um, but it can be at whatever far back or however proximate to now recent, or it can be it, you know,
really far back in the past, but at some point there had to be some first domino to fall.
Otherwise there just wouldn't be dominoes falling now.
Well, I don't think so. I think that domino was caused by the domino prior to it and the domino
prior to it and the domino prior to it. And I think the, the God doesn't solve the problem
because the God has to figure out, uh, why that infinite regress is allowed through special
pleading, but the infinite regress of the universe isn't. So God, if you want to go there,
if you want to talk about that, God's not an infinite regress. Oh, he certainly is.
No, he's not. Why do you think that? Absolutely is. Because God can't exist without time either.
Why do you think that God can't exist without time? Because you need time to do things and God
does things. Like God has thoughts, God speaks, all those things happen in time. God has thoughts,
God speaks. The only, according to Christian view that we're examining here, the first time that we
God's speaking is at the creation of the universe. He's spoken into existence. Right. So Christians
could, could say, okay, well, yeah, of course you get speaking there, but why think that they're
speaking prior to time? Like you suggested. Did he think about creating the universe before he created
it? Great question. God's thoughts, as we're told are not like our thoughts, but we can, you know,
not to be simplistic and patronizing about that, but God's thoughts are immediately accessible to him
at all times. And Christians believe in impassibility, that an unchangeability in God.
Well, let me ask you a better question. You believe in eternity?
So that God would not be affected whatsoever. Yes.
Do you believe that prior to the creation of the universe, that Jesus and Yahweh could have a
conversation with each other? I don't think that they would need to converse with one another.
And the way that we are discussing. Yeah, of course.
That implies time.
That implies time if they did it. I only said it was possible that they did it.
That's what I'm saying though. If they're capable of having a conversation, that conversation
could only happen in time. I mean, we're capable of going to Mars, but we haven't done it.
Right.
So like, but one of them is possible. Does it mean that it requires time?
Right. So, so it, it would be like mental communication. It would be like my thoughts
being immediately accessible to me. Well, then they're not having more than they're not having
a more immediate way. Then they're not having a conversation.
So no. So that it wouldn't be a conversation the way humans understand conversations. No,
not at all. Okay. So then they technically can't have a conversation prior to the creation
of space, time, universe. So let me explain it to you this way. So, so just to answer your
question, sorry. Could you repeat the question? I don't want to just move on without.
Right. Okay. So my, my complaint here is easy. Anything that involves a sequencing of time,
like having a thought or sharing a thought, none of that's actually possible without time.
Okay. Yeah. So, so the idea here is that God, according to philosophers and theologians,
and I don't mean to bog this down in any terminology whatsoever, but it is clear that if we are
criticizing a specific view, it's important that we know what the view is claiming. I think you'd
agree. So, so philosophers and theologians think that God is what they call pure actuality. There is
no, so actuality and potentiality. These are pitted against each other as sort of like you have what's
potential, then you have what's actual, something that's potential, something that is possible to
happen. Something that is actual is just something that is currently happening. So if God is pure
actuality, that means that there is no potentiality in God. There's no potentiality at all. There,
everything that could be happening to God is already happening. So this is how they consider God's
thoughts and ideas. They are immediately accessible. That's why I meant by immediately
accessible. The idea that these things are actually what they, anything they would be like for me as a
human and for you, we have potential thoughts. Not all of our thoughts are actual to us, but for God,
they are all actual to him.
Right. Which is what I'm saying though, thoughts are sequenced.
No.
Or else you don't have a thought.
Thoughts are only, thoughts are only sequenced if it's discursive reasoning. You know how it's,
discursive means kind of like you write in cursive. It's like from one thought to another,
to another, to another, to another. This wouldn't be the case in God, in the mind of God.
Oh, certainly it is. He says so in Exodus.
How's that?
Let me read for you. I think it's Exodus 33. Let me double check. Yeah. Exodus 33, 5. And I'll read
it to you. I'll put it on the screen, although you won't be able to see it, unfortunately, but I
think everyone else will be able to see it.
I'm looking it up.
Um, okay. So God is upset after the golden calf incident and he doesn't quite know what he's going
to do with the people. And so he says this really interesting thing. Um, has Moses speak to the
people? And this is his words. Uh, the Lord said to Moses, say to the Israelites, you are a stiff
necked people for, I'm sorry, if for a single moment I should go up among you, I would consume
you. So now take off your ornaments and I will decide what to do with you. And some translations
will say, I will think, or I will consider what to do with you, which means God's processes,
his mental faculties are operating in a sequence.
Okay. So that, that's your proof that God thinks discursively.
Well, he says so.
Right. Okay. So, um, first of all, it's very dangerous to have one cherry picked text as
a proof text. Um, and we know that in Christian theology, I've got more, uh, anthropophobic,
anthropomorphic traits are projected onto God that God doesn't necessarily have. Like,
does God really walk in the garden? Uh, does God really have a face that he turns to people
and turns away from people? No, of course not. So, um, he puts things in terms that humans
can understand it, you know? So I think that I would translate this. I think I'm not alone.
Let me think about what to do with you. It would be something like, look, what I end up doing is
going to be dependent upon what you do. Like, it'll, like what avenue you choose is going to
determine what my, my, uh, my outcome is.
And the problem is he didn't say that. That's what you want him to say.
Right. But the problem is the Bible doesn't read like wooden literalism.
Right. But the problem is I'm reading it for what it says. And God says, I need to make a decision
about what to do with you people. That is a sequenced event.
I didn't expect to get into, uh, biblical analysis here, but let me ask a follow-up question with
respect to just interpreting. Would you suggest then that anytime the Bible says something,
we should just take it at face value? No, I think we know when an idiom is being employed. Like when
it says Adam knew his wife Eve, we know that's an idiom for doing the cha-cha. We get that. And
there's lots of Hebrew idioms. I, I know because I had to learn them when I took Hebrew. So the reality
is we know when a metaphor is being employed. We know when an idiom is being employed. This idea of,
well, every time God says something that makes him look human-like, we just must assume that he
doesn't actually mean it. This is somehow him just anthropomorphizing himself, which is not actually
the case because in the narrative that we just read, not only is he talking about doing a sequence
of events, he does a sequence of events and he does so elsewhere. There's a bunch of instances
where God is finding things out or knowing things in a sequenced event.
How do you mean?
Like when he has Abraham almost execute his son, all right? Talk about Genesis 22, right? In verse 12,
in Genesis 22, when he's got the dagger in the air, he's about to stab, and he gets stopped. He says,
now I know, right? He's saying, now I have the information. He says the same thing in Deuteronomy
chapter 13. He's going to test his people to know what is in their heart. He says the same thing in
Deuteronomy 18 before he declares that he's going to execute everybody in Sodom and Gomorrah. He says,
I must go down and see if the outcry that has risen up to me is as what it seems, and then I will know.
Like God keeps employing this idea that he has information he needs to obtain, and those are
things that happens in sequences.
Yeah, so this, I don't see this as information God needs to obtain. I see this as his interaction
with humans. I mean, that seems to be pretty obvious to me. I don't know how it can be confused.
Does he know?
Yeah, of course.
Then why does he say, then I will know?
Because he's writing for humans.
But he could have just said, I already knew.
See, this is the thing with communication. I'm sure you can understand this as well.
If you wanted to communicate a very complex idea to somebody who didn't know it, would you, I mean,
you would bore people to that. I'm sure. I mean, I'm sure you wouldn't have many people be hanging
on it. So if in the Pentateuch, in these verses that you're offering here is evidence of, well,
God must think discursively, and he changes his mind about things.
He does.
He's very human-like.
Exodus 32, he does.
Well, if that's the case, we can easily say that that's wrong, because God has these other
attributes.
So the Bible is wrong?
Namely, no, I'm saying that's wrong. I'm saying that interpretation is wrong. Namely,
because we already know that God is the creator of the universe, and that God is absolute being
within the Christian world, which is what the world you're attacking is, correct?
So this is my favorite thing about talking to philosophers, is the God that you've dreamed
up through some philosophy is not the God of the Bible. The God of the Bible doesn't know
everything. The God of the Bible does change his mind. Do you want to see exactly where?
Go for it.
Okay. We're going to go to Exodus 32. He clearly states, it clearly states that he changed his
mind. This is after the golden calf incident, right? Give me one second to grab the passage.
Although, I think in the King James it says repented, but it's the same word in Hebrew.
Okay, so if you go to Exodus 32, verse 12.
32, 14.
Right?
And 14.
Yeah, 12 through 14 is kind of the same situation. He says he's going to wipe out all these Israelites
because they've acted wickedly, and then it says the Lord changed his mind about the disaster
that he planned to bring on his people. So he does change his mind.
Right. So I don't see a problem here.
Well, can an all-knowing being change his mind?
Let me ask you this, because the initial question in our conversation that you begin with is what's
your most compelling evidence for God's existence or for your God or what have you? I don't take
this problematic interpretation as evidence that God does not exist.
No, no, no. I'm not saying that this proves—
I think there's no inference there whatsoever.
I'm not saying this proves no God exists.
I'm saying this proves that the God you think of is not the God of the book. The God of the book
changes his mind. He says he changes his mind.
I don't think it does. I don't think it does. There's ways to synthesize what's being said here
with what theologians have said about God.
I know what he says.
And I think you know this.
I think you know this.
Read it out loud.
I do know this, which is why I know that you're wrong. Verse 14 says Yahweh changed his mind
about the disaster. Did he change his mind or did he not?
So that's anthropomorphic language. I mean, why say that right here—
You can't answer the question.
Why say that—I am answering the question. Why say that right here, that means literal.
He changed his mind. But when he walked in the garden, that's not literal.
Well, again, I think he did walk in the garden. He does the same thing in Deuteronomy—
And he's got a face.
He does the same thing in Deuteronomy 32. So there's actually good scholarship on this.
I would recommend reading When Gods Were Men by Professor Esther Hamori.
Mm-hmm. So this makes God into just sort of an anthropomorphic kind of member of a polytheistic
pantheon or something, something like the Greek gods or something, like very human life.
The ancient convention of God in the ancient Near East and even in the Mediterranean were
that they were somewhat like superheroes. They ate and they drank. In fact, in Exodus, the
same book we were just reading. In chapter 24, God's on a mountain, and they see his feet. They
behold a vision of God, and they're up there having a meal with him. And then in Genesis,
he eats. In Genesis 18.
Okay, let me point you to—and I'm not trying to be a jerk about this, but if we want to get the
God of the Bible, we have to take the whole Bible into account.
So Genesis 1, when God created everything, God created the heavens and the earth. The earth
was without form, without shape, darkness, over the void, over the abyss, a mighty wind
sweeping over the waters. And God said, let there be light. That doesn't sound human to me. So if
these authors are saying, well, you know, God was just a human made into a God, that seems to ignore
the entire Genesis 1 account. Why do that?
Well, first of all, it doesn't. Second of all, that's not what I said. And to say Jesus or God
was a human, although Jesus was a human. I'm saying the God of the ancient Near East or the
gods in the ancient Near East were more human-like than the gods of philosophy. They could eat. They
could drink. They had anatomical appendages. They could speak.
I agree.
Like, they could hear. They had the physical capabilities of doing such things. When God
gets mad, in Hebrew, it literally talks about his nose, his off, his hot nose. Because the idiom
for being mad is that you got a hot nose, right? So all the language we have about God in the Bible
is that he's got these physical characteristics, which is why, interestingly enough, when he creates
mankind, mankind is created in the image, the likeness of God. And this is the exact same
verbiage that's used for all of Adam's descendants. Adam had sons in his likeness,
meaning they have a physical representation that is like their maker.
I'm just waiting for the conclusion, the inference to the conclusion that God does not exist, like
absolute being all reality, the creator of the universe.
That's not my argument at all. My argument is that God you believe in is not the God of the Bible.
The God of philosophy and the God of Christianity are two different things.
I never said that I agree with the God of philosophy, the classic philosophers,
the God of classical theism. I never said that.
Right.
In fact, if you remember, I said I believe in the God is understood by Catholic theology. I'm Catholic.
I said that at the very beginning.
And again, my argument is about the Christian God, right, or Catholic God for your sake.
And what I'm suggesting is that the way the Catholic God is described in the Bible
is not the same God you're describing through philosophy. They're different things.
I would beg to differ because there's entire, if we're looking at the Catholic God and Catholic
theology, there's an entire tradition, which, as I was mentioning and gesturing out earlier,
that unpacks what these verses mean, right? This is why we have even textual analysis that we can say,
oh, that means idiom. Oh, this is apocalyptic literature or whatnot. So that all came out of
this textual analysis and hermeneutics and interpretation.
I've read the church fathers. They can't agree on what half these texts mean either. They can't even
agree on whether or not hell is eternal or whether or not it's just annihilation. They're split right
down the middle.
Right. They have disagreements.
Yeah.
I don't see why that, I don't see how that undermines what my, my claim was, which was
my point is the foundation to interpret these, these things like that doesn't undermine that.
You say they like they're a cohesive bunch. Like they came together and they agreed on an
appropriate interpretation of say, Exodus 32, 14. They didn't, they did no such thing.
I'm not suggesting they all agreed. I suggest that you like the ones that agree with you.
Theologians. I said, I'm suggesting that the theologians is a very conservative claim
here that I'm suggesting theologians, early church fathers, which you used as a collective
term. So I think I'm entitled to use as a collective church fathers. They disagree with
one another. Sure. They laid the foundation for interpreting the Bible. That's all I'm saying.
Very conservative claim. I never, never said that they all agreed with each other, but they didn't
lay the foundation. If they can't agree on what it means, what they've done is giving, they give us
differing opinions, just like the Jewish rabbis in Talmud, the Jewish rabbis in Talmud argue with each
other all the time. They didn't lay the foundation for what the correct interpretation of all the
passages are. They laid a foundation of here are possible ways to interpret the passage.
That's what I was getting at. I never said that they laid the foundation for the correct
interpretation. I mean, I think that's true, but my claim was that they laid the foundation
for interpreting these scriptures. That's all I said. It's a very conservative claim. I don't know
why you're disagreeing with it. No. Well, I don't think, uh, I think you and I were making two
different, uh, claims. Your claim sounded like the interpretation given by the church fathers should
be accepted because it's true. And I'm saying I don't have a good reason to accept it as true.
That's a further claim, and I think that you were anticipating that, and I endorse that. So,
yeah, I think that there are certain interpretations that are correct.
And I don't. So, I mean, I'm sure they get some stuff right and some stuff wrong, like every human,
right? When it comes to Acts 32 and the other passages where God clearly changes his mind, I have
no reason to believe that it means anything other than God changed his mind because I've studied the
ancient Near East and the gods changed their mind all the time. Okay. Yeah. So, this is where I am
saying that we do not read the text literally in certain points. I know. Right? So, we are given
that guidance by theologians who came before us. Oh. And so... Okay. So, when Moses went down from
the mountain... I would not read that literally. When Moses went down from the mountain in verse 15,
he literally went down from the mountain, or did he metaphorically go down from a mountain?
He literally came down to the... See, that would be a really easy... What's your point?
Verse 13, the verse before it went, it says,
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, how you swore to them by your own self, saying
that I will multiply your descendants like the stars of the heaven, and all this land I have
promised, I will give your descendants, and they will inherit it forever. That's not metaphor.
That's literal, right? Yeah. Okay. It's just that one verse where it says that the Lord changed
his mind. Now, we have to take that as non-literal. Sure. Why? Yeah, because of other things we know
about God's nature. Like what? That he's not human. I never said he was human.
Are you sure you didn't say that? Could you remind me of what the claim was? Because you were
suggesting something about ancient Near East gods. The claim is that... And that the God of the Bible
is very human-like and unlike the God of the philosophers. So just remind me... The God of the
Bible is not an immaterial, spaceless, timeless deity. So, how do you arrive at that if, like I said in
Genesis 1, God created all of space and time and, you know, and matter. So, like...
He didn't. It didn't say that. He was... It did say...
Certainly did not say that. He created the heavens... God created the heavens and the earth.
The sky and the land. Yeah. Hashemayim in Hebrew just refers to the skies.
Okay. There's no concept of this celestial heaven far away from the earth in ancient Near Eastern
cosmology or even in the Bible. The sky is always the literal place where the clouds are, just above
the earth where God resides. In fact, his throne, according to Psalm 150, is just at the top of the
firmament. What do you think the God of the Bible is, then? Like, in terms of if he's not immaterial,
but that he created the heavens and the earth, is he some sort of demigod?
Well, again, you're assuming that there was nothing outside of the heavens and the earth.
I'm not assuming anything. I'm asking a question.
So, I would classify him as more in line with an ancient Near Eastern deity or even a Greek deity.
Now, I believe that it's better to think of him like an ancient Near Eastern deity that has
both a spiritual and a physical presence. The spiritual presence can do some things that the
physical presence can. So, for example, if you read in the Hittite literature, there is an incantation
for performing the duties when you put up a new temple for the goddess of the night. And the goddess
of the night has an actual physical manifestation in the literature, but she can actually dwell in two
different temples at once because her spirit can dwell in one place and in another place at the
same time, even though she has a physical manifestation. The same way probably early people
thought about Jesus and the Father. He could manifest in multiple physical realities and multiple
spiritual realities because he's like a superhuman, more super than less human.
Okay. So, okay. So, I don't have anything to reply to that, but it's just good to know.
Right. But my interpretation, I can match up with everything the Bible says about God, right? The
idea that God is a spaceless, timeless, immaterial entity is not found in the Bible, right? You have
to intuit that from philosophy and then eisegesis that into the Bible.
It's not eisegesis. It's exegesis. And it's good exegesis.
Then show me the passage where it says that.
I mean, I can show you some experts who know this a lot better than I do, and you—
But I studied with the experts.
But I'm not an expert in this area. Look, man, I—
I can appeal to the experts. I can tell you my Old Testament professors who agree with me.
I studied with experts as well.
I know you did.
I've got a seminary degree as well, but I don't wave it around. You've mentioned
half a dozen times that you've studied with or you've read this or you've read that. I'm not
an expert in this area. But if you want to talk about this, I'm not an expert in this
area. And so I'd like to get back, if you would like, with your permission, to the initial
conversation that I'm still not a specialist in, but I have a lot more understanding and
expertise in the area of philosophy of religion. I don't have—I said this in the email as well,
I said before. I said, look, I'm not an ancient Near East. I said this literally. I'm not an
ancient Near East expert. So I know that the conversation, of course, naturally goes here,
and that's your background a little bit. So you would naturally go there. But just to flag that
for anybody watching this, I'm not an expert in this area, and I'm not here to talk about
ancient Near East stuff. If you want to do that, talk to somebody else. Maybe Wes Huff. I saw somebody
in the chat asking you to get Wes Huff on. I think that'd be delightful to see that. I would tune in
for that. But I'm not the person to talk about ancient Near East stuff.
Fair enough. But you are comfortable talking about the Bible, right?
Yeah, it depends on what. I mean, yeah, I took Bible just like you did. I mean, anybody that's
publicly available information, if you want to go look me up and look at my CV, anywhere available
online, you can see all the courses I took. Does that mean that I'm an expert on those subject
matters just because I took graduate seminars and New Testament, Old Testament, hermeneutics,
and so on? I'm not, doesn't make me an expert, right? So I'm conversational about these things,
but I'm not necessarily going to be able to tell you all the literature around this. Like you're
citing certain experts. I would have to kind of go back to my own notes and figure out who
actually writes. Some things that come to mind, probably somebody like Bruce Metzger or Ben
Witherington, but those, I don't know who's publishing now. I mentioned Wes Huff.
Ben's probably not publishing anymore.
Probably not. Right. So I know, I know some of these names, but again, I'm only barely
conversational about this. I can speak with a non-expert, but I'm not going to be able to have
a sustained conversation about these things. Fair enough. All right. So I think we were,
as far as I can tell, we're still stalled out on premise number one of the cosmological argument.
Yeah. So what got us into discussing Genesis, and well, I think it was Exodus. Anyway, what got us
discussing that you brought up the idea that God changes his mind, and you thought that this was
evidence for discursive reasoning? I understand that. That's understandable, and you've got your
reasons to think that God can think discursively. But back to what I'm coming from, from a Catholic
philosopher background, God has no discursive reasoning in his mind. He is pure actuality.
This is what I mentioned before, and that if those things are expressed in writing, those,
I would chalk those up to just being, you know, here are the consequences that we're laying out
because you, a human, and your free will took this certain route, or it would be in the manner of
translating into human words that they can understand that won't God change his mind in a sense to mean,
well, you can't understand pure actuality. We're not going to get into that in Exodus and these
chapters. That's not the point. So we'll just very simplistically write, God changes mind.
That's what got us into it.
Could he have not said anything? If God didn't change his mind,
then you don't have to say anything. You can just say, you know, God dealt with them as he saw fit.
Bada bing, bada boom, it's done.
Yeah. Given the extreme event of commanding Abraham to sacrifice his son in all future generations,
you know, he had one when he was a hundred or something, um, giving that, the, the, the stakes
of that, um, to say nothing, to provide no explanation whatsoever, I think would be severely
lacking. I think it would confuse a lot of people.
Well, I, you're talking about Genesis 22, but we were talking about Exodus 32. Genesis
22 is a different story.
I'm talking about Exodus 32.
Right. We're talking about, well, that's Moses, not Abraham, right?
Oh, I'm sorry. Um, so in Exodus 32, God's about to wipe out the Israelites because of the golden
calf incident. And he tells Moses, Hey, step aside. I'm going to wipe all these Israelites
out and I'm going to turn you into a nation because these people are stiff necked. And then Moses talks
him off the ledge. He's like, no, no, no, don't, don't do this thing. Think about the promises
that you made. And then it says, God changed his mind after Moses pleaded with him to change
his mind. Why would God go through all that if he didn't actually, uh, intend to do it? Because
one of two things is true. He said all that, not intending to mean it, which means he's a liar,
or he legitimately changed his mind, which means he changes his mind. But both of those are
contradictions to numbers 23, 19.
I don't think so. So if, uh, if a police officer says drop the weapon or I'll shoot,
like that is a claim. I will do this thing, but of course him. Yes. Yeah, absolutely. And if,
and if, and if he holsters his gun because you dropped the weapon, does that mean that he was
lying? No, but based on your action, he responded appropriately.
God didn't say, do this and then I'll do that. He says, I have seen this people,
how stiff-necked they are. Now let me alone so that my wrath may burn hot against them,
that I might consume them. And of you, I will make a great nation. He didn't say if they behave,
if they repent, he just said, move aside. I'm going to wipe these people out. And then Moses,
it says, Moses implored, uh, the Lord, his God and said, Oh Lord, why does your wrath burn? And so he
talks them off the ledge. And then after Moses is done saying, Hey, maybe take a breather, think
about this for a second. Then God changes his mind. Like the whole story is quite, uh, quite reasonable.
Once you understand how the ancient Near Eastern concepts of gods were the minute you try to
introduce this God that doesn't actually think in time, it falls apart because he either changed his mind
or he's a liar. Right. So we're getting bogged down in scripture again, but let's turn back.
Let's turn back to what my expertise is. And it's barely an expertise. I wouldn't even cite it as an
expertise, but philosophy of religion. Let's assume for the sake of argument that, that, that like what
I'm saying, that the Catholic view just is that God can't think discursively. That's the claim.
That's the claim is pure actuality. There is no change in God.
But why would I think that? So why would you, why would you make an assumption in a logical
argument? No, no, I'm saying what, why would I, like what, if you're, if you're saying, well,
listen, I have this, um, you know, my conclusion is somewhat based on this idea that God doesn't
think recursively. Right. And I'm saying, I, I don't see a reason to believe that to be the case.
I'm asking you, can you support that claim with something?
I mean, I'd have to brush up on my literature on pure actuality. I can give you recommendations.
You know, obviously Thomas Aquinas talks about it. There's a really good book called the one
and the many, uh, by W Norris Clark, who's Jesuit author and scholar. Uh, and he does, he's an evaluation
of Thomistic metaphysics. Uh, and he get, he gets in there. And then the other, you know, the other
book I often use just primary sources of Aquinas and they, uh, he was exposing Aquinas in this terms
of pure actuality, this, what that actually means. And as far as I understand it, and it's hard to
understand, um, but as far as I understand it, that if there were potentiality in God, it would impugn
God's sovereignty in some way. It would make it such, like we were describing earlier, that God would be
open to changing his mind, that that would make him sort of, some sort of dependent on other things.
Uh, and of course, if God's dependent upon creatures, then he's not sovereign over creatures.
Why not? Dependent upon them.
He's not dependent on them. He's, he's allowing himself to, um, react to other things. He didn't
have to, right? Like, so in, in the worldview, I don't know if you've spent any time looking into
open theism, but, um, open theism or process theology, which is like the sister of open theism,
is this idea that, um, God could just completely get rid of your free will and can be 100% sovereign
and, uh, be the cause of all things. Or God could choose to limit himself the same way he limited
himself when he sent Jesus to the earth. He could limit himself and allow humans to make their own
decisions, uh, and then react to those decisions. But obviously, as the name implies, process theology
happens as, as a process. Yeah. I took process theology to mean that God himself is a process,
not a substance. I'm not saying substance. I'm saying that in, in process theology, God is
in a partnership, uh, sort of an agreement with mankind that he, like there's an ultimate arc.
You know, the Bible says in Isaiah that God declares the end from the very beginning and they
accept that. They say, yes, that's true. God knows the ultimate end game, but, um, he is working
in unison with mankind to achieve those goals. He's not forcing those goals. It's a process.
Right. Yeah. You know, um, so I know this is very, or at least in the years I was in seminary,
it was very fashionable among, uh, evangelicals to, to sort of explore these areas with respect
to process theology and open theism. I've even got a few books on the things and on my shelf behind me.
Um, but as far as Catholics understand, I believe that they think them as heresies. Uh, you can,
Oh yeah, for sure.
Track me on that if I'm wrong.
No, you're right.
Uh, open theism is just recycled heresy from, uh, 16th century guy named Socinius. So it's a view
called Socinianism and, uh, it just recycles the same old idea. And of course they, they're going
to affirm. So this open theism, what it says is since the future doesn't exist, then God does
have omniscience. It's just that his omniscience is limited in the same way. Omnipotence, right?
Omnipotence is limited, uh, in the sense that God's omnipotent, but he's only all powerful in the sense
that he can only do the things that are logically possible to do omniscience. So, so he can't lift
like a rock that, you know, he can't create a rock that's too heavy for him to lift. Cause that's
just logically impossible. And it can't create a square circle that's logically impossible,
but well, I had a question. I think you're the right person for this, which is why can't God do
logical impossibilities? Because a metaphysical possibility is dependent upon logical possibilities.
So something that's logically impossible is not metaphysically impossible. Something logically
possible not. It, it's a weird thing because it's, it's odd to say God created logic. God
is logic himself in the sense of like, God is reason himself. He's ultimate rationality.
So logic is, it would just be in his character. It's the same thing with goodness. God's identified
with the good. And so he couldn't do things that are contrary to his nature.
So God is, uh, his nature is that he does things that are logical, right? And you're
suggesting that because he has a particular nature logic exists, it's like a manifestation
of his nature. Right. What does that even mean? How does it, how does a nature manifest?
Right. My nature manifests in the ways I express to other people. Right. But of course, God's,
God's going to be unique in the sense that when he expresses his nature, it's going to have a lot
more authority than, you know, and a lot more implications for other people, you know? So I liken it
to a very fashionable view these days with respect to, um, uh, the simulation theory. Right. So many
people like to think about this. I don't, I don't think it's true, but it's, it's a fun puzzle to
think about. Suppose there's a simulator, a designer, this thing, we're all living in a simulation.
Um, if that guy decides to do things or have purpose for the simulation, like I can think about
whatever purpose I like, but it's ultimately going to depend on what, whatever the designer, the
simulation design for me, same thing. But like, if he wants to express certain things, like I can
express things all I want within the limitations that I have, that I've been designed for. But
if that guy wants to express something about himself to, you know, it's going to look different.
Does God have control over his nature? Um, what do you mean? Can, can God control, like I can't
control my own nature. Like I can't control the fact that I have a brain that thinks like, that's
just part of being a human. Right. But if God is all powerful, I would imagine that he has control
over his own nature. Like he can decide what his nature actually is. Yeah. So control, I, I, so,
so control is meant in a couple of ways. So control, if it's like static control, the idea
that I just want to control it or like govern it or just have control over something management,
in other words, uh, sure. Yeah. Yeah. He has that, but control for the sake of changing something.
Well, no, he's not going to be able to change his nature because he's unchangeable.
So then he's not all powerful. If he can't do something, it's just definitionally true.
He can't do something that's logically impossible to do. Right. But if he has control over logic,
that means if, and he, if he can't change logic, that means he's bound by it.
So if he's bound by his own nature, that means he's just not all powerful. He's like mostly powerful.
I'm sorry. I don't see the problem. The problem is definitions, right? There's no exceptions to the
word all. I'm sorry. Can you repeat what you think the problem is? Uh, the problem is that like
definitions in English have like, uh, definitive meanings. Like when we say something is all
encompassing, like all powerful, that just means that there's nothing he can't do. Now you're
saying, well, the reason why he can't do logical impossibilities is because somehow it's a
fundamental manifestation of his nature, which I didn't put the burden on you to prove. Um, not that
you couldn't, I'm sure you have an argument for it. What I'm suggesting though, is that, okay,
let's call it part of his nature. Okay. Well, does God not have control over his own nature?
And if God doesn't have control over his own nature, then that's just one more thing he can't
do. Yeah. So he can't do things that are logically impossible. I think that we just keep coming back
to that. So right. Because he can't control his nature. He is in control of his nature, but he can't
change his nature because he's unchangeable. That is by definition what he is. Nature, then he can't
do something. Which is that definitionally true. This is like saying that, you know, since God's
immaterial, if he can't be material, then he's not all powerful. That, that seems a really odd.
I don't think material has anything to do with power. I mean, theoretically, if you're all
powerful, you should manifest materially, whatever God's attribute might be. Right. So if God's divine,
if it can't be not divine, then he's not all powerful. That seems a really silly kind of way of
arguing in my view. That's not my claim. My claim is just pure definition of words, right? You believe
in a God that's all powerful, but you keep telling me there are things that he can't do. You keep
telling me that he's all knowing, but the Bible says there are things he doesn't know. So like,
I mean, I appreciate that you have this concept of God. I've heard it many times on this stream from
other philosophers. I just, to me, it's a nonsensical view. If God is the creator of all
things, that means there's not one thing he didn't create. And if he has control over all things,
that includes himself. And so if he doesn't have control over his own nature, then we can't say
that he is in control of all things. We can say he's in control of most things, minus one.
I acknowledge that he has control over his own nature in the sense of control, authority over
his own nature, grasp of his own nature, management of his own nature. But if you want to talk about,
yeah, that's the thing. He doesn't have control in the sense of being able to change his nature.
That's something he lacks. It's a power he lacks.
Right. So when I say this is, with all due respect, I think it's not a good argument because
like I say, you know, God also can't commit acts of evil. Does that mean that that makes him less
powerful? But he can't do that. He's all good. In the Bible, he does. He's all good. Let's just,
okay, I'm not getting into the Bible. Let's assume, like not that I won't, but I didn't prepare for
that. But Derek, this is what I keep trying to tell you. Like the God you believe in philosophy is not
the God of the Bible. Let's just stick to the argument. Let's just stick to the argument.
All right. Let's try to be very narrow here and focus. I think we've lost our point in the
argument. I don't know what part we're at anymore in the argument. We got rabbit trailed.
Well, it's a God's attribute. So you said that since God doesn't have control over his ability to change
his own nature, that somehow that makes God not as powerful or he's just not all powerful.
I think this is a silly argument, like I said. So suppose, as Christians claim, that God is
omnibenevolent. He's all good. For someone to criticize that and say, well, he can't commit
evil, so he must not be all powerful. Like that seems a very odd way of arguing. I don't think
it's a very good argument at all. It doesn't impugn God's power if he's not able to do certain
things. It's definitionally true is my argument. I'm not impugning God. I'm saying that if he can't
do all things, including logical impossibilities, then you have to get rid of the word all because
all doesn't have exceptions. Right. So if you want to get into definitions, there's not just
one kind of definition. In fact, I mean, I looked this up earlier in the logic book because I was
applying to a comment on my channel. This seems to be like a common thing. It's like, well, just think
about the dictionary definition. Like this eats me up as a teacher. Like it's like, you know,
if anybody starts out, for example, I'm not saying you're doing this, but everybody starts out an
essay. It's like the dictionary, dictionary.com says, you know, it's like, it's like, no, no, no,
because dictionary definition is only one kind of definition. So what's the alternative definition
of the word all? We have, let me just run through what kinds of definitions there are. So we have
extensional definitions, which you can have like a picking out depth kinds of definition. Like this
means this, like, so if I have an orange, for example, and you ask me, what's an orange, I just
show you, this is an orange, right? That would be a definition. It's called an ostentive definition.
We've got a numerative definition where I just enumerate different kinds, uh, definitions by
subclass. And then there are intentional definitions, not intentional with the T intention,
but intentional with an S meaning it's internal. So by that, uh, lexical definitions fall there.
That's your dictionary definitions. Like, uh, but there are all, there are also stipulative
definitions. Like let's suppose for the sake of argument, a, a gobble fart is such and such.
And then I just define my thing like that, that'd be a stipulative definition. There are precising
definitions. When you have issues of vagueness, like what is baldness? What does it mean to have
a beard? Do you have a beard? Do I have a beard? Right. And then there are theoretical definitions
with respect to the necessary and sufficient conditions for what a thing satisfies in order
to be that thing. So, uh, I assume when somebody says, well, that's just what the definition of
X means. They're referring to the dictionary definition. Just, this means like common social
understanding of what a word means of received wisdom. Um, but that's not necessarily as any teacher
of, of composition, certainly any philosophy teacher. Uh, if a student writes, oh, dictionary
says this, I mean, that's not necessarily what is the best definition. Like it's just how people
talk. Let, let me give an example. I know how definitions work. I'm asking you, can you provide
a definition for the word all that has exceptions? I did. So omnipotence means all powerful with respect
to doing all the things that is possible for God to do. But just omnipotence is a different word.
And, and again, you've created an exception to it, right? I'm talking about the word all or
either omnipotent or all. I think we can go with either one. And there is no exception to omnipotence.
There's no exception to the word all it's, it's every part of the whole. Yeah. So no, no, no
philosophical theologian thinks that all applies to all things. So all doesn't mean all. Okay.
Just checking. That's why I said, he doesn't mean omni either, but that's what I'm saying. If you
don't label, if you don't mean all, then you have to find a different word. Like if, if all,
if all doesn't mean all, then you needed a better word. Sure. I'm open to a better word. I'm not the
one who stipulated the word. I mean, this is like calling yourself an atheist and be like, well,
I'm an atheist, but I'm not this kind. I'm not this kind of this kind. It's like, well, why use the
word? Well, because it has utility. Sure. It applies in many different respects, but maybe not in these
respects in these respects. I don't see a problem with this. You could say he's like maximal power,
maximally powerful. Sure. That's fine. You could say he's most powerful. I mean, yeah, I don't see
why we're getting hung up on this to be, to be honest with you. I'm not getting hung up on it. I'm
just letting you know that the definitions like have like meanings when we're having semantic
discussions. And when you use words like all, and then you say there's exceptions to all, well,
then all is no longer an appropriate adjective. That's fine. We can change the adjective. I'm open
to that. I'm not the one who labeled God's attributes. I wasn't there like what a thousand
years ago when these things got added. So nobody asks my opinion. I'm just using the terms that are
standard in the literature. And I think any theologian, any philosopher who uses these terms,
they don't mean that God can do the logically impossible. So I don't think that this is a very
good objection. Sure. But I agree with like just basic rationality that I don't see a good reason
why God wouldn't be able to change the laws of logic. If he's the one that has control over all
things, why can't he change them? Because he can't change his nature. Why can't he? Because another
attribute of God is unchangeable. I'm just using this, like, I'm just giving you what Christians
believe. I know what Christians believe. I'm asking you to support the arguments, right? So
why can't God change his nature? You want me to give you an argument for why God is unchangeable.
Yeah.
Because it goes back to actuality and potentiality. If God has potentiality within him,
that means it's possible. So if we think about this in terms of motion, something that has potential
motion and not actual motion is that something that is potential motion means it's not
actually currently moving. In other words, potential motion just means it's at rest. It is not
motion at all. So potential motion is just not motion at all. So if we say that God has potentiality,
then that actually limits God in his sovereignty and his attributes and so on. So if God is pure
actuality, again, I mean, I could give you people to read on this, put it in the chat if you like,
or in the video description, but it's W Norris Clark. I don't have it within reach, but I can go
back to my bookshelf if you'd like to show you what it looks like, but it's very easy to find. It's
called The One in the Mini.
Our Discord friends will have it posted in about 30 seconds.
Awesome. Awesome. The One in the Mini. It's not an easy read, but if you want to know more about
God's attributes with respect to pure actuality, why God has to be unchangeable, why God has to be,
you know, pure goodness, goodness itself, truth itself, beauty itself, all right there. So it's,
it's, it's not accessible because these ideas are not accessible. They're not, but, but I, I've met
people who don't like online friends who don't have a doctorate, don't even have any degree in,
in, in philosophy whatsoever. And they're able to pick up on these things. So for the people who
are interested, um, if they read around on this, there's plenty of literature on this.
Sure. So, I mean, we've been at it for about an hour and a half. We should probably try to progress
our conversation as much as possible so we don't lose the entire audience. Uh, where, where did we
leave off in the actual point of discussion? Somehow we, we started the cosmological argument
and we got, we got lost in the middle of it. Yeah. So I don't even think we were in the middle.
I don't think we were either. Yeah. We were somewhere near the beginning.
You know, I, I suppose I could share screen on this. Couldn't I? I think you can. I don't
know if anyone can see it, but we'll see what happens if you try it. Yeah. I mean, I can probably
manipulate it. No, that's the argument that I, hold on. Let me see if I can put it on screen.
I can put it on screen. It's going to be rather small, but I can blow it up though. Hold on. Go
ahead. I'm listening. Okay, cool. Yeah. It's going to be rather small, but that's, that's the idea.
Um, I think we were only at, well, I think, I don't even think where we were, but premise one
is just going to be, this is an empirical observation, uh, causes happen, cause and effect.
I look out into the world. I see the causes are happening. Uh, I would look at that. Some people
are going to deny that causation happens like Hume, David Hume. Some people are going to be like,
oh, well, we can't know of the world that exists outside our minds. Um, those people are going to
have issues with this premise, but I think for most common sense people, they're going to be like,
yeah, movement, causation, things are happening outside of me. Sure. Nothing exists prior to
itself. Uh, this is just a, uh, a metaphysical reality, I think. So this is unobjectionable.
I don't disagree with premise two, but yeah, but I think this is where you and I differ,
right? Is you're assuming I think it's the series, right? Yeah. You're, you're assuming that it didn't
exist prior to itself and then God made it exist. But then I would push back. I would say, well,
first of all, I don't believe that to be the case. We already talked about that. But secondly,
you would have to explain why God isn't somehow special pleading, right? So if the universe can't
exist prior to itself, then, uh, and live in an infinite regress, then how is it that God can't?
And then we got into the whole nonsense discussion about God actually living within time,
because as far as I can tell, there can be no sequencing of any types of events without time.
And that's why I resisted that by saying that, and this goddess, this is what I think triggered the
whole side quest of looking into the Bible, discursive reasoning, all that is because I
resisted that by saying that, uh, thing if, if God exists outside of time, that's not the only view
that you could have. But if God exists outside of time, then, uh, then there wouldn't be any change
in God. This is just one of the, uh, risk just well known attributes of God among Christian
theologians is he's unchangeable, impassable. He can't be affected. Yeah. Immutable. Yeah.
So that's what got us off track. Um, special pleading. Let's talk about that. I think,
I think that, and I had a video on this about how the atheist special pleads and a lot of people
didn't like that. A lot of people didn't like that because I think that there could be some
special pleading here. You know, not all atheists are the same kind of person, but I think that,
uh, if the atheist, for example, denies, uh, the principle of cause and effect, then you don't get
this, right? Uh, so, so for example, have I denied the principle cause and effect? In fact, I, I'm,
right. I'm insisting that cause and effect actually happens and it's been happening infinitely, which is,
I mean, theoretically, the only way God could have spoke things into his existence, he spoke it and
then it happened cause and effect. So in that, in that case, I would, I would say, look,
I think you have a special case of special pleading because you're saying that, um, for all other
things, you know, we like to use empirical observation, but for this, it's okay. We don't
need it. It's just that we don't, we don't know if it's always been, uh, ad infinitum into the past
internally into the past that cost effects have been happening, but we just think that it is.
All right. What I'm saying is all the evidence we have points towards that. Like I don't have any
evidence that would point me towards the fact that once nothing existed, I have no evidence of that.
All I can do is use the evidence I have.
I think, I think the opposite here. So, so I don't, I don't want us to be at an impasse,
but I think that all the evidence points towards, uh, an ultimate beginning in the big bang.
I think science disagrees. They don't disagree about the big bang.
They, they agree that the big bang happened. They disagree with the claim that there was nothing
prior to it. Right. So here's the thing, like that, the originator of the big bang theory was
a Catholic priest. He did not think that there was, that it, that just, it just continued on and
on and on and on, or that the big bang happened. There was nothing that caused it. These sort of
atheist proposals. They, so, so the originator of the theory himself, you know, for whatever
that's worth, I'm not saying it's worth everything, but for somebody who knew what he was talking
about, he thought that these things were, maybe he thought that the evidence led to God.
Well, yeah, because he existed before modern cosmology.
Modern cosmology does not disprove God.
I didn't say it did. I'm saying that the, the opinion of the person you're appealing to
lived at a time where he doesn't know what we know now, just like people at the early
days of, of learning human biology don't know what we know now. Yeah. They did some great
anatomy field work, but we know infinitely more today than they knew a hundred years ago.
Yeah. So I don't, I don't think that knowing more about cosmology would make you not believe
in God. Because again, I think that, so let's imagine, I don't know if you said anything with
respect to the multiverse, but, or let's just imagine infinite series, whatever those things
are, it would get us into the third way with respect to contingency. Like those things are
contingent things. We have no other reason to think that they're otherwise. I mean, I know you
want to resist that and that's fine. No, I didn't deny that the, that the, the items within our
universe are contingent. I'm just saying that it's an infinite cause. Oh, the universe as a whole. No,
it's just a brute. Yeah. See, that's unsatisfying to me. But we know that you don't say, you're just
saying God is a brute fact. And I'm saying the thing we know exists, the stuff we know for a fact exists
is a brute fact. You're saying, no, no, no, I don't like that brute fact. So I'm going to appeal to a
different brute fact that I have no evidence exists. That's see, see the thing. I don't think
those are similar whatsoever. I don't think God is a brute fact. Okay. Then you'd have to demonstrate
why I would accept, accept the God claim. So, so the brute fact is the idea that here's something I
have no evidence for it whatsoever. It's just an assumption. I'm proven hypothetical speculation
here. That's a brute fact. I can't tell you why, but it just is. That's not what I'm doing with God.
But you haven't provided a single reason why we need a God. What does God, what problem does God
solve? Because as far as I can tell, he creates more problems than he solves.
I mean, you could perhaps allege that me saying that an infinite regress is impossible is a brute fact.
That I'd be okay with. But I get to God's existence by saying an infinite regress is impossible.
And that's an inference. That's not a brute fact.
Yeah, but why is it impossible? Like, so we've done this before. And again, I have the infinite
regress argument about 4,000 times. And it never ends where you want it to end. It's never going to
end in me accepting that infinite regresses are impossible.
Because infinite regress never ends.
You got it. And so the reality is that you either do or you don't accept that infinite
regresses are or are not possible. And I can't see a good reason to believe that they're not
possible. I've never seen a good argument for it. And I've seen the argument. I've heard the
domino argument. I've heard Hilbert's Hotel. I know all the typical arguments that are used. I don't
find any of them to be convincing. And everything I know from science would point me towards the fact
that we do have an infinite regress.
So let me ask this. Now, I'll have to wrap up here because I've got an appointment I got to get you
at the top of the hour. But do you think everything has to have a cause?
I think everything does have a cause. And I think it's an infinite regress of causes again.
So that seems nonsensical to me, only for the fact that how does an infinite regress cause itself?
And if you want to say it, would you say that an infinite regress causes itself? Just to break it
down.
Well, an infinite regress isn't a thing. An infinite regress is an idea.
It's the process of things that are causing themselves.
Right. But processes aren't things that exist. They're descriptions of how things behave.
Sure.
Right. It's like the scientific method isn't the thing that exists. It's a description of
a process, right?
Sure. I agree with you.
So I don't think an infinite regress needs a cause because it's not a thing.
But that an infinite regress, the process could just be infinitely long to have no beginning.
That's what you think.
Yeah. I think that's parsimony is with what we know from science.
Now, listen, we might discover something down the road. We might learn 25 years from now that
that's not true. That as it turns out, we find definitive evidence that prior to the Big Bang,
there was absolutely nothing. Well, that information hasn't occurred. We don't have that
evidence. All the evidence points to the contrary. And if we did have that evidence, to me, it still
wouldn't point me towards the God. I would still posit a naturalistic phenomenon that caused the
initial moment, right? So even if we accepted that there was an initial moment, we have no reason to
accept that it was caused by a God.
Yeah. So why would you then go back to a naturalistic explanation?
Because it's—
Why the resistance to a supernatural?
Because it's easier to explain with less entailments, right? Once you include a God,
now you've got entailments. You've got something that is a thinking agent that has a mind,
will, and emotions, and desires, right? And then you have to explain those desires. This is where we
get into the problem of natural evil, right? Like, okay, now if we're going to say a God is
responsible for it, we've got a lot of unexpected things coming from this new God that invented
everything. Like, why does he create a world that has infinite suffering? For example, earthquakes,
volcanoes, tsunamis, these things don't really serve a purpose. These are unnecessary sources of
suffering.
As far as we know.
Can you think of why they're needed?
Because I'm a human? No, I cannot.
Right. Exactly.
What this argument assumes is that we humans know better than God that God has no reason for this,
and that's a big leap that's not substantiated.
Could God accomplish the goals without them?
I'm not God. I don't know.
If he can't, then he's not all powerful.
So to your point, well, that's not necessarily true.
Sure it is.
So Leibniz has a view on which, like, he talks about the best universe that could exist,
and it's not going to be the one without any suffering whatsoever.
Why didn't say anything about all suffering?
This is his response to the problem of evil.
Right. So this is his response to the problem of evil.
I'm talking about earthquakes.
Natural suffering or evil.
Natural phenomenon.
That's what I meant.
No, no. Evil is like something humans do. Like, you insult somebody and you ruin their day.
I'm talking about hurricanes.
Natural evil, hurricanes, earthquakes, and so on. I understand. Yeah. So Leibniz,
his response to the problem of evil, is to say that God, in his infinite wisdom,
would know how to balance out all the things such that there would be the lowest amount of evil things,
natural and human evil, and the highest amount of good in the world. Right? So like he would just
know what balance of those things would be. If it's such that having maximal good in a world
with no evil would end up being less good than having a little bit of evil and a little less good,
right? Because we know that good can come from evil.
We know that good can come from evil.
When people are in earthquakes and tsunamis, like we shouldn't take them to the hospital.
Like, aren't we intervening with God's desires?
No.
Okay.
That's non sequitur.
So the natural disasters, what are they good for? What do we need them for?
I don't know.
Okay. That's what I'm saying. Natural disasters are an unexpected reality where there's an all good,
all powerful about.
You're not agnostic about this. You're making some outlandish claims about, with all due respect,
some claims that are unsubstantiated. Hey, I as a human know that God has no reason for this,
and even if he did, his reasons are really bad.
I didn't say that. What I'm saying is if God couldn't accomplish, like, if God needs to send
a, whatever, a tornado through Mississippi, if he needs to do that to accomplish his goals,
then you're implying that he couldn't have accomplished his goals without the tornado,
right? Is that the implication?
I suppose there are—I mean, given that the tornado was contingent, there are other ways
to accomplish his goals. It might include a different tornado, it might include a different
disaster, it might include just no disaster at all. I'm not God. I don't know. I'm not omniscient.
But if we presume that God sent the tornado because he needed outcome X, Y, and Z, right?
Could he achieve outcome X, Y, and Z without the tornado?
I mean, I don't think the tornado is necessary. I think it's contingent, so—
You nailed it. It's not necessary. It's unnecessary disaster, unnecessary suffering.
The minute you tell me that tornadoes are not necessary, they become unnecessary.
Now, I know you think that was a clever admission, but it was not.
It was a great admission. I'm glad you finally gave it to me.
No, because if you recall what I just said earlier, it could have been that tornado,
it could have been a different one, it could have been an earthquake, it could have been
no tornado or earthquake whatsoever, it could have been anything, because those things are
contingent.
But then it'd be necessary.
God could see that he brings it about. Does everything God do, is it necessary?
That's what I'm saying.
I think the creation of the world is contingent.
Well, when God is doing things—
He would very well have created nothing in the world whatsoever. But if God has certain
purposes, certain aims, certain goals, such that the maximal amount of good could be brought
about in the world, then those are his aims, and he will do things that go towards those aims.
That's my point, yeah.
So it could be this, it could be that, it could be another thing, but—so each one of those
things is contingent.
That's what I'm saying. God is doing something to achieve his goals. And we, in your worldview,
the natural disasters are something that God obviously needs to achieve his goals. So
if he needs them, then they're necessary, right? But if he needs them, then you're suggesting he
couldn't do it another way. If he could do it another way, then they're no longer necessary.
Yeah, that's not what philosophers mean by necessity. Like, I'm talking about metaphysical
necessity.
I'm not talking about metaphysical necessity. I'm talking about God's ability.
So I'm, I'm, I am denying that these are necessary, and I'm affirming that they are
contingent with respect to metaphysical necessity. Obviously, they're not necessary like that. Like,
the reality of numbers and mathematical truths, logical truths, those things are
just necessary.
So God doesn't need them.
It could possibly be otherwise. The, the events in the world, contingent, empirical events, no.
The natural disasters. Okay. So God doesn't need to use natural disasters to accomplish his goals,
right?
I don't know. I'm not God. Like, you're trying to get me to say, you're trying to get me to say,
with respect to me being a human and make, that's like getting an aunt to say, Hey, why do you think
these people moved into this house? You know, like, what, why do you think their goals were?
Like, why would they do it that way? Cause they have done it. That's, it's just ridiculous.
That's why I started the conversation with, it's an unexpected reality, given your framework,
given the framework that there is an all loving, all knowing, all powerful entity that is also,
uh, wanting to accomplish his goals. If, if he can't do it without a natural disasters,
then somehow he's bound and he's not all powerful. If he can do it with the natural disasters,
but doesn't have to, then that means the natural disasters aren't needed to accomplish his goals,
which means it's just unnecessary suffering. It's not actually all good. You've got a Mexican
standoff with the Omni properties. Yeah, I don't think so. And if you want to talk about the,
the problem of evil, there's a logical problem of evil, which is what you're discussing.
The idea that there's this magic Mexican standoff, in other words, that they're logically
inconsistent somewhat. And then, so that's the logical problem of evil. Then you have the
evidential, no, sorry, sorry. The existential problem of evil that more of like human suffering
in general, I'm going through something hard. And so I find it really hard to believe that God
exists. The logical problem of evil. If you read philosophers of religion, they consider the
logical problem of evil to be resolved. It's not a problem at all. Like even atheist philosophers
will say this. Yes, there are atheist philosophers of religion, like Graham Obby. There's not a lot,
but there are a few. The logical problem of evil is considered to be solved. The existential problem
of evil, that of suffering is still open. Like people going through a really hard time, getting
cancer, losing their job, whatever it may be, they find it really hard. They find it really hard
to believe that God exists. And so it's not finding it hard to believe. What I'm saying is it's
inconsistent with the attributes that are given to God.
Like, yeah. So if, if you want to do more reading on this and I'm sorry, I've got to go,
but, um, I would recommend reading, uh, Eleanor Stump. She's a emeritus professor of philosophy
at, uh, St. Louis university. Uh, she's a Catholic philosopher herself, uh, very, uh, imminent
and well-known. And she's written a book. I think it came out in 2012. I think, uh, Oxford
university press is called walking in darkness. It's an examination of look at the problem
of suffering. So, and in that, of course, she's got to set it up. So in that, she also
talks about the logical problem of evil. So this would be a good reference to go look
at both if you like.
Sure. And I'll be definitely engaging in some philosophy this year. It's not really where
I spend most of my time because I don't think it provides you with, with, uh, solutions
that are, um, we'll say the average person cares to hear about. Um, but that being said,
you know, if, if we find these instances where to say, okay, God has these attributes and then
we look at the world around us and say, are these attributes consistent with our observations?
If they're not consistent, then I'm inclined to believe that those attributes can't be the
case.
Yeah, that's totally understandable. Um, and just with respect to like these high level
heady conversations, I myself don't always find them all that, uh, enjoyable, you know,
because they're hard work, I think, but I think doing the hard work, reading the philosophy,
that sort of thing that I don't always do. Uh, I think some people may think that, I don't know
what would give them the impression that I'm always reading, but I'm not, uh, I've got to turn
it off sometimes too, because you got to go out and live your life. You got to have real everyday
conversations. Uh, but I think doing the hard work is, uh, it's worthwhile. It's, it's worth it. And
like examining what philosophers, what theologians have said about these things that we've discussed
here today, that it, the payoff then comes in the everyday conversations, being able to say,
okay, well, I understand it this way. What do you think? And so on and so on.
Yeah. Well, listen, um, Dr. McAllister, I enjoyed the conversation. I know that this is,
um, a contentious conversation for a lot of people and you've been incredibly cordial
and, um, you've even tolerated me talking over you a few times, which you don't have to,
you didn't have to do that. I grew up with like a family of five kids, so I'm used to it.
Yeah. I was the youngest of eight. Like that, this is our love language is yelling at each other.
Exactly. Exactly. You don't get heard all the time. This is why we're on YouTube, right?
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, but so I appreciate you coming in and being cordial and, um, and so,
you know, big W for coming in and, uh, do come back because, um, you were one of the few philosophers
that came in and didn't try to bury the conversation in jargon. And that those are conversations that go
nowhere. They're, they're not helpful for me or the audience or anyone else.
Well, I appreciate that. I'd love to be back. Um, got to run now, but, uh, we'll set it up again
soon. Do you have my email and, uh, I look forward to it. All right. Take care, man.